>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 9:
RESIDENTS IN FERGUSON, MISSOURI
REMEMBER MICHAEL BROWN, KILLED
BY A POLICE OFFICER ONE YEAR AGO
TODAY.
HOW PROTESTS IN FERGUSON, AND
THE FORCEFUL POLICE RESPONSE,
HAVE AFFECTED POLICE TACTICS
NATIONALLY.
AND, FROM IDAHO, HOW RARE
POLITICAL COOPERATION PRESERVED
THIS WILDERNESS AREA FOREVER.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, IS MARKING A
SOMBER ANNIVERSARY TODAY.
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE MARCHED
PEACEFULLY IN THE ST. LOUIS
SUBURB, ONE YEAR AFTER UNARMED
BLACK TEENAGER MICHAEL BROWN WAS
SHOT DEAD BY A WHITE POLICE
OFFICER.
THE MARCHERS FIRST GATHERED AT
THE SPOT WHERE BROWN WAS KILLED,
AND THEY STOOD IN SILENCE FOR
FOUR AND A HALF MINUTES TO
REPRESENT THE FOUR AND A HALF
HOURS THAT BROWN'S UNATTENDED
BODY LAY IN THE STREET.
AFTER THE MOMENT OF SILENCE,
ORGANIZERS RELEASED TWO DOVES.
FEDERAL AND STATE PROSECUTORS
CLEARED OFFICER DARREN WILSON OF
CRIMINAL WRONG-DOING IN THE
SHOOTING, BUT HE IS NO LONGER
WITH THE POLICE FORCE.
WILSON HAD CONFRONTED BROWN AS A
SUSPECT IN A CONVENIENCE STORE
ROBBERY.
THE SHOOTING TOUCHED OFF WEEKS
OF PROTESTS AND GALVANIZED THE
BLACK LIVES MATTER MOVEMENT.
AMONG THE CHANGES IN FERGUSON IN
THE PAST YEAR-- MORE DIVERSE
LEADERSHIP: A NEW INTERIM POLICE
CHIEF AND CITY MANAGER, WHO ARE
BLACK.
A NEW PRESIDING JUDGE FOR ITS
MUNICIPAL COURT, AND TWO NEW,
BLACK REPRESENTATIVES ELECTED TO
THE CITY COUNCIL.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN A CITY
THAT IS TWO-THIRDS BLACK,
AFRICAN AMERICANS HOLD HALF THE
SEATS IN THE CITY COUNCIL.
EARLIER, I SPOKE WITH ONE OF
THOSE NEW MEMBERS, WESLEY BELL,
ABOUT CHANGES IN FERGUSON OVER
THE PAST YEAR, AND CHANGES STILL
TO COME.
>> COUNCILMAN BELL WHAT'S
CHANGED IN THE LAST YEAR?
>> A LOT OF THINGS.
ONE, I THINK THERE'S AN
AWARENESS OF THESE ISSUES.
A LOT OF THESE SOCIAL ISSUES
THAT PREDATED FERGUSON.
THAT ARE REGIONAL THAT
THEY'RE -- THAT ARE NATIONAL AND
WE'RE HAVING MORE CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT -- ABOUT PRIVILEGE AND
TENSIONS BETWEEN LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND SOME OF OUR COMMUNITIES,
PARTICULARLY OUR YOUNG PEOPLE.
THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS TO BE
ENCOURAGED ABOUT AS WELL.
>> YOU HAVE BEEN ON THE JOB FOR
A LITTLE MORE THAN 100 DAYS OR
SO NOW MORE THAN TWICE THE
NUMBER OF AVERAGE VOTERS SHOWED
UP TO HELP YOU GET INTO THIS
ELECTION CYCLE.
WHAT HAVE YOU LEARNED WILLIAM.
>> I HAVE -- LEARNED?
>> YOU HAVE TO ENGAGE THE
RESIDENTS, YOU HAVE TO GET
INVOLVED BECAUSE YOU NEED TO GET
THE RESIDENTS INVOLVED.
A COMMUNITY THAT'S ENGAGED CAN
ACCOMPLISH ANYTHING AND KEEP IN
MIND: WITH THE WORLD WATCHING
IN FERGUSON, IF WE GET IT RIGHT
HERE, WE CAN SET A BROAD EXAMPLE
NATIONALLY AND EVEN
INTERNATIONALLY OF WHAT CHANGE
CAN LOOK LIKE.
>> WHAT HAS BEEN DONE OVER THE
PAST YEAR TO PREVENT ANOTHER
MICHAEL BROWN-TYPE SITUATION
FROM HAPPENING IN THIS
COMMUNITY?
>> WELL, I
THINK WHAT WE'RE DOING IS WE'RE
HAVING THESE HARD CONVERSATIONS.
WE'VE IMPLEMENTED COMMUNITY
POLICING WHICH I'VE BEEN
SCREAMING FROM THE HILLS FOR A
WHILE NOW.
WE HAVE BROUGHT EXPERTS IN TO
HELP US WITH THAT FOR OUR --
HELP US CREATE A MODEL THAT IS
APPROPRIATE FOR OUR CITY.
WE'VE ALSO HIRED OUR NEW CHIEF,
HE IS THE FIRST AFRICAN AMERICAN
CHIEF IN FERGUSON'S HISTORY.
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY HE HAS A
BACKGROUND IN COMMUNITY POLICING
AS WELL AS WITH OTHER TRAINEES,
ON THE FEDERAL LEVEL AND THINGS
OF THAT NATURE.
ALSO WITH OUR COURTS WE HAVE ONE
OF THE BEST JUDGES IN THE STATE
IN JUDGE DONALD McCULLEN.
WHO IS HEADING OUR COURTS RIGHT
NOW.
AND MAKING SURE THAT EVERYONE IS
TREATED FAIRLY.
WE'VE REPEALED A LOT OF THE
ORDINANCES, PARTICULARLY THE
FAILURE TO APPEAR ORDINANCES
THAT WERE CAUSING A LOT OF
EXCESSIVE FINES.
SO I THINK THERE'S A LOT GOING
ON, AND LET ME BE CLEAR:
THERE'S NO DENYING THE CHANGE.
ALL RIGHT?
THERE'S NO DENYING THE PROGRESS
I SHOULD SAY.
NOW, HAVING SAID THAT WE STILL
HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO DO.
Sreenivasan: SO THE DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE IN THAT REPORT WHICH
I'M SURE YOU'VE READ, POINTED TO
SYSTEMIC ISSUES, BETWEEN 2012
AND 2014 EVERY TIME SOMEONE WAS
ARRESTED FOR SOMETHING, THEY
WERE BLACK.
NOW EVEN WITH THE CHANGES YOU'VE
MADE SO FAR ONLY FIVE OF THE 50
OFFICERS ON YOUR FORCE ARE
AFRICAN AMERICAN.
HOW CAN YOU DEAL WITH WHAT MIGHT
BE A MUCH DEEPER PROBLEM IN THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT?
>> WELL, AS FAR AS THE NUMBER OF
POLICE, WE CAN'T JUST FIRE
OFFICERS.
ESPECIALLY THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY OF OFFICERS WHO ARE
HONEST AND HARD-WORKING.
BUT I THINK GOAL IS TO RECRUIT
AND LOOKING -- AND LOOK OUTSIDE
OF THE TRADITIONAL WAYS OF
RECRUITING SO WE DO GIVE
EVERYONE AN OPPORTUNITY WHICH WE
HAVE.
AND THE COUNCIL SINCE I'VE BEEN
ON HAS APPROVED FUNDING FOR
SCHOLARSHIPS TO SPONSOR
OFFICERS, PREFERABLY MINORITY
OFFICERS THROUGH OUR DEPARTMENT.
BECAUSE AGAIN IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT THE DEPARTMENT BETTER
REPRESENT THE COMMUNITY.
HAVING SAID THAT, WE'RE NOT
LOOKING TO BRING IN OFFICERS
JUST FOR SAKE OF DIVERSITY.
IT'S IMPORTANT, WE'RE NOT GOING
TO -- IT IS IMPORTANT WE DON'T
COMPROMISE BRINGING IN QUALITY
INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE THE
COMMUNITY'S BEST INTERESTS AT
HEART.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID YOU
STILL HAVE SOME WORK LEFT TO DO.
SO WHAT WOULD YOUR CONSTITUENTS
SAY STILL NEEDS TO BE DONE?
>> I THINK TRUST NEEDS TO BE
EARNED.
SO AS A RESULT NO MATTER WHAT
CHANGES WE DO IN A COUPLE MONTHS
SINCE I'VE BEEN ON THE COUNCIL,
YOU KNOW I WOULD, EVEN IF I WAS
JUST -- IF I WASN'T AN ELECTED
OFFICIAL I WOULD STILL WANT TO
SEE A LONGER SAMPLE SIZE IF YOU
WILL.
SO I THINK A LOT OF RESIDENTS DO
SEE THE CHANGE AND SEE THE
PROGRESS.
BUT, YOU KNOW, FOR THOSE WHO
DON'T, HEY, WE'RE GOING TO KEEP
TRYING TO BRING YOU OVER TO OUR
SIDE AND SHOW YOU WHAT WE'RE
DOING.
WITH EVERYTHING THAT'S HAPPENED
JUST A YEAR AGO, IT WOULD BE
NAIVE OF US TO THINK THAT
EVERYTHING WILL BE WELL AND THE
SLATE WILL BE CLEAN.
WE HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO DO,
THAT'S WHY I RAN, I WANTED TO BE
PART OF THAT HUMAN PROCESS AND
PART OF THE SOLUTION.
>> WESLEY BELL OF FERGUSON,
MISSOURI THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS TO HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING THE
PROTESTS THAT FOLLOWED THE
EXTRA-JUDICIAL SHOOTING OF
MICHAEL BROWN, THE SPECTACLE OF
FERGUSON POLICE PATROLLING THE
STREETS IN COMBAT GEAR WITH
MACHINE GUNS AND ARMORED
VEHICLES SPARKED ANOTHER
CONVERSATION.
LIKE A LOT OF POLICE
DEPARTMENTS, FERGUSON'S HAD BEEN
EQUIPPED WITH MILITARY SURPLUS
PROVIDED BY THE PENTAGON, AND
GEAR PURCHASED WITH DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY GRANTS.
BUT THIS YEAR, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS CURTAILED
THOSE MILITARY SUPPLIES."
NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER MATT
APUZZO HAS COVERED THIS ISSUE
AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
>> FIRST OF ALL, HOW PREVALENT
IS IT THAT POLICE DEPARTMENTS
GET THIS MILITARY SURPLUS
EQUIPMENT?
>> WELL, I MEAN IT'S VERY, VERY
PREVALENT.
I MEAN THIS PROGRAM, THIS IDEA
OF MILITARY SURPLUS GOES BACK TO
REALLY THE HEIGHT OF THE DRUG
WAR, WHEN THE IDEA WAS THAT
LOCAL POLICE WERE BASICALLY
OUTGUNNED BY DRUG GANGS.
AND SO THE THINKING IN
WASHINGTON WAS, WELL WE CAN TAKE
THIS EXTRA MILITARY EQUIPMENT
AND PROVIDE IT TO LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS TO HELP FIGHT THE
DRUG WAR.
AND OBVIOUSLY LIKE A LOT OF
PROGRAMS IT KIND OF RAMPED UP
EVEN MORE AFTER 9/11, AND THE
FOCUS BECAME, YOU KNOW, A LOT OF
COUNTERTERRORISM KIND OF STUFF.
YOU TEND TO SEE
HUMVEES NIGHT VISION GOGGLES AND
THE LIKE.
>> WHAT IS THE CHANGE NOW, WHAT
IS THE ADMINISTRATION PROPOSING?
>> OVER EXECUTIVE OWED THAT WENT
THROUGH IN JANUARY, WHAT THE
PRESIDENT IS SAYING THERE'S NOW
A RESTRICTED GROUP OF EQUIPMENT.
THAT WOULD BE INCLUDING
BAYONETS, HIGH CALIBER RIFLES,
TRACKED TRUCKS.
THESE ARE THESE BIG TROOP
TRANSPORTERS THAT LOOK LIKE
TANKS, OBVIOUSLY DON'T HAVE THE
CANNON MOUNT ON THEM THAT RUN ON
TRACKS.
THOSE ARE THE PROHIBITED ITEMS.
MINE RESISTANT VEHICLES YOU CAN
GET BUT YOU HAVE TO GO THROUGH
ALL THESE HOOPS AND YOU HAVE TO
PROVE YOU'VE TRAINED ON IT AND
HAVE POLICIES ON HOW TO USE IT.
AND YOU HAVE TO EXPLAIN WHY YOU
HAVE A NEED TO HAVE IT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IN ADDITION
TO SOME SORT OF OVERSIGHT THAT
TAKES A LOOK AT WHAT YOU'RE
DOING IN YOUR POLICE FORCE,
RIGHT?
>> EXACTLY RIGHT.
YOU KNOW WHAT WE SAW JUST A FEW
MONTHS AGO, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT DID A REVIEW OF
FERGUSON'S RESPONSE AND THE SORT
OF ST. LOUIS REGION'S RESPONSE
TO THE PROTESTS AND RIOTS AFTER
THE BROWN SHOOTING.
AND WHAT THEY SAID WAS, YOU KNOW
WHILE SOME OF THE EQUIPMENT WAS
USED APPROPRIATELY A LOT OF IT
WAS JUST USED INAPPROPRIATELY
AND UNNECESSARILY.
AND POLICE OFFICERS DIDN'T KNOW
WHO WAS IN CHARGE.
AND YOU HAD THIS ARMORED CAR,
ARMORED TRUCK GOING AROUND WITH
SNIPERS POISED ON THE ROOF OF
THE CAR POINTING THEIR WEAPONS
AT CIVILIANS.
AND THAT IT ONLY SERVED TO
REALLY HEIGHTEN TENSIONS AND
ACTUALLY JUST MADE THINGS WORSE.
Sreenivasan: AND INTERESTINGLY
THERE HAS BEEN PUSH BACK ABOUT
THIS SHOW OF FORCE THIS
MILITARIZATION OR THIS POSTURE
BUT IT REALLY TOOK THE DEATH OF
MICHAEL BROWN THE REACTION IN
FERGUSON TO DO THINGS THAT
LEGISLATORS AND ACTIVISTS COULD
NOT DO.
>> SURE I MEAN, FORGET COULD NOT
DO.
IT WAS ALMOST NO INTEREST IN
DOING IT.
THIS IS WHAT WAS REALLY
REMARKABLE IS, THINK ABOUT IT
FOR A SECOND.
THIS IDEA OF BEEFING UP LOCAL
POLICE DEPARTMENTS, TO FIGHT
TERRORISM, IS KIND OF THE
CORNERSTONE OF OUR DOMESTIC
POST-9/11 RESPONSE.
SO THE FACT THAT IT TOOK A DEATH
OF A YOUNG AFRICAN AMERICAN MAN
IN ST. LOUIS COUNTY TO FORCE
UPON THE COUNTRY A HUGE
RECONSIDERATION OF THE THINKING
OF, THAT WE NEED TO HEAVILY ARM
POLICE DEPARTMENTS TO FIGHT
TERRORISM.
IT'S JUST SORT OF REMARKABLE.
BECAUSE UNTIL RECENTLY, THE ONLY
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THESE TYPES OF
PROGRAMS WERE, IS MY POLICE
DEPARTMENT GETTING ENOUGH?
HOW COME HE -- HOW COME THAT
CITY GOT MORE THAN MY CITY?
THOSE WERE THE DEBATES THAT WERE
GOING ON IN WASHINGTON.
NOBODY WAS SAYING, HEY DO WE
REALLY NEED TO HAVE ARMORED
TROOP TRANSPORTERS IN LOCAL
POLICE DEPARTMENTS?
NOBODY WAS SAYING THAT UNTIL
FERGUSON.
THAT IS A REMARKABLE MOMENT FROM
A WASHINGTON POLICY STANDPOINT.
>> ALL RIGHT MATT APUZZO, GREAT
TO HAVE YOU.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM PAINTINGS
TO POETRY, TAKE A LOOK AT SOME
OF THE ARTISTIC WORKS INSPIRED
BY THE EVENTS LAST YEAR IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ARLINGTON,
TEXAS, POLICE DEPARTMENT HAS
ASKED THE FBI TO ASSIST ITS
INVESTIGATION INTO THE FATAL
POLICE SHOOTING OF AN UNARMED
BLACK TEENAGER FRIDAY.
CHRISTIAN TAYLOR WAS A 19-YEAR-
OLD SOPHOMORE WITH A FOOTBALL
SCHOLARSHIP AT ANGELO STATE
UNIVERSITY IN SAN ANGELO, TEXAS.
POLICE RESPONDING TO A 1:00 AM
BURGLARY CALL AT A CAR
DEALERSHIP ENCOUNTERED TAYLOR,
WHO HAD ALLEGEDLY DRIVEN HIS OWN
CAR INTO A SHOWROOM WINDOW.
POLICE SAY, AFTER AN
ALTERCATION, ONE OFFICER FIRED
HIS GUN FOUR TIMES AT TAYLOR.
THE OFFICER WHO SHOT TAYLOR,
BRAD MILLER, IS IN HIS FIRST
YEAR ON THE JOB.
MILLER, WHO HAD NOT FIRED HIS
GUN ON DUTY BEFORE, IS NOW ON
PAID LEAVE.
ARLINGTON'S POLICE CHIEF SAYS
THE FBI ASSISTANCE WILL INCREASE
THE INVESTIGATION'S
TRANSPARENCY.
>> THIS INSTANCE HAS NOT
OCCURRED IN ISOLATION, BUT
RATHER IT HAS OCCURRED AS OUR
NATION HAS BEEN WRESTLING WITH
THE TOPICS OF SOCIAL INJUSTICE,
INEQUITIES, RACISM AND POLICE
MISCONDUCT.
>> Sreenivasan: "WASHINGTON
POST" REPORTER JASON REZAIAN IS
EXPECTED TO APPEAR AT HIS FINAL
COURT HEARING ON ESPIONAGE
CHARGES TOMORROW IN TEHRAN.
REZAIAN, AN IRANIAN-AMERICAN WHO
HOLDS DUAL CITIZENSHIP, IS
ACCUSED BY IRAN OF SPYING AND
DISTRIBUTING PROPAGANDA."
THE POST" CALLS THE CHARGES"
BASELESS AND ABSURD," AND THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS CALLED FOR
HIS IMMEDIATE RELEASE.
THE HEARING, TO PRESENT
REZAIAN'S DEFENSE, IS CLOSED TO
THE PUBLIC, AND IT IS UNKNOWN
WHEN THE COURT WILL RENDER A
VERDICT.
IRAN HAS JAILED REZAIAN FOR A
YEAR.
HIS WIFE AND TWO
PHOTOJOURNALISTS ARRESTED AT THE
SAME TIME WERE FREED.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAYS THE IRAN
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT DEAL PENDING
BEFORE CONGRESS AFFECTS AMERICAN
CREDIBILITY.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH CNN'S
FAREED ZAKARIA BROADCAST TODAY,
THE PRESIDENT REMINDED CRITICS
THE PACT WAS BROKERED WITH FIVE
OTHER MAJOR POWERS: RUSSIA,
CHINA, GERMANY, FRANCE, AND THE
UK.
>> THE ISSUE HERE IS NOT SIMPLY
THE DEAL ITSELF, IT'S CERTAINLY
NOT JUST AN ISSUE FOR MY
PRESIDENCY.
THE ISSUE IS DOES THE REST OF
THE WORLD TAKE SERIOUSLY THE
UNITED STATES' ABILITY TO CRAFT
INTERNATIONAL AGENDAS, TO REACH
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS, TO
DELIVER ON THEM IN WAYS THAT
GARNER THE RESPECT AND THE
ADHERENCE FROM OTHER COUNTRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS 70th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE ATOMIC
BOMBING THAT ENDED WORLD WAR
TWO, JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER
SHINZO ABE IS CALLING FOR A
WORLD WITHOUT NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
IN NAGASAKI TODAY, A BELL TOLLED
AT 11:02 AM, TO MARK THE MOMENT
WHEN THE BOMB DROPPED BY THE
U.S. EXPLODED, ON AUGUST 9th,
1945.
THIS SECOND NUCLEAR ATTACK
KILLED MORE THAN 70,000 PEOPLE
AND LED TO JAPAN ANNOUNCING ITS
SURRENDER SIX DAYS LATER.
>> Sreenivasan: EUROPE IS COPING
WITH A CONTINUOUS INFLUX OF
MIGRANTS FROM AFRICA AND THE
MIDDLE EAST, PARTICULARLY FROM
WAR-TORN SYRIA AND LIBYA.
SO FAR THIS YEAR, THE UNITED
NATIONS SAYS, 225,000 MIGRANTS
HAVE CROSSED THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA, WITH MOST LANDING IN ITALY
OR GREECE, OFTEN AFTER BEING
RESCUED FROM RICKETY BOATS.
JUST LAST MONTH, 50,000 MIGRANTS
MADE THE JOURNEY.
BUT AN ESTIMATED 2,100 MIGRANTS
HAVE DIED AT SEA THIS YEAR.
ITN'S PARAIC O'BRIEN HAS THE
STORY OF HOW GERMANY IS DEALING
WITH THOSE SEEKING ASYLUM.
>> HELGA BRUGER LOOKS OUT ON
TO THE COMMUNITY GARDEN OF HER
LEAFY HAMBURG STREET.
THE COMMUNAL GARDEN IS ABOUT TO
GET A LOT MORE COMMUNAL.
THE GERMAN ARMY ARE BUILDING A
CAMP TO ACCOMMODATE 500 ASYLUM
SEEKERS.
SO FAR THIS YEAR HAMBURG ALONE
HAS ACCOMMODATED NEARLY 6,000
MIGRANTS, DOUBLE THE SIZE OF THE
JUNGLE IN CALAIS.
>> GERMANY WILL END UP DEALING
WITHIN THE REGION OF 400,000
MIGRANTS THIS YEAR.
THE TRADITIONAL IMMIGRATION
CENTERS ARE FILLING UP.
THUS THE NEW CAMPS.
ABOUT 200 A DAY FOR EXAMPLE
COMING FROM ITALY TO THE
BAVARIAN TOWN OF ROSSENHEIM.
>> THE GERMAN ELECTORATE ARE
PRETTY PHILOSOPHICAL RIGHT NOW,
BUT ONLY IF THE SYSTEM IS
WORKING.
IF IT STARTS TO BUCKLE UNDER THE
NUMBERS, GERMAN POLITICIAN HE
ARE ACUTELY AWARE THAT THAT
COULD CHANGE.
IN THE MEANTIME, PREPARING FOR A
THOUSAND NEW MIGRANTS.
TONY SMITH USED TO BE IN CHARGE
OF THE U.K.'S NEW BORDER AGENCY.
HE'S NOW RETURNED FROM TURKEY.
>> 1.7 IMMIGRANTS IN TURKEY.
NOW IF YOU ARRIVE IN TURKEY FROM
SYRIA, WILL BE IN 2023.
YOU'RE LOOKING AT EIGHT YEARS OF
LIMBO.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO?
TRYING TO STOP ESTABLISH
YOURSELF SOMEWHERE ELSE?
>> WHICH IS WHAT THESE FAMILIES
WERE DOING.
IN AUSTRIA 86 PEOPLE INCLUDING
16 CHILDREN FOUND IN THE BACK OF
A VAN.
HOLES CUT IN THE ROOF FOR AIR.
CALAIS, PRO-MIGRANT
DEMONSTRATION.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CALAIS
AND HAMBURG LET'S SAY, THE
MIGRANTS WANT TO GET OUT.
THE ONE IN GERMANY BY AND LARGE
WANT TO STAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A HUGE SWATH OF
WILDERNESS IN IDAHO WILL NOW BE
PROTECTED FROM DEVELOPMENT, DUE
TO LEGISLATION PASSED BY
CONGRESS AND SIGNED BY PRESIDENT
OBAMA ON FRIDAY.
THE DESIGNATION FOR 275,000
ACRES OF PUBLIC LAND IN THE
BOULDER-WHITE CLOUDS MOUNTAINS
ENDS A FOUR-DECADE PUSH BY
ENVIRONMENTALISTS, RANCHERS, AND
RECREATION GROUPS.
IT ALSO MARKS A MOMENT OF
BIPARTISAN COOPERATION BETWEEN A
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSIONAL
DELEGATION AND A DEMOCRATIC
ADMINISTRATION.
ROCKY BARKER OF "THE IDAHO
STATESMAN" AND OUR COLLEAGUES AT
IDAHO PUBLIC TELEVISION ALONG
WITH EARTHFIX HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: THE BOULDER-WHITE
CLOUDS MOUNTAINS IN CENTRAL
IDAHO ARE A SCENIC LANDSCAPE OF
SOARING MOUNTAIN PEAKS, LUSH
FORESTS, AND PRISTINE LAKES AND
RIVERS.
275,000 ACRES OF THIS PUBLIC
LAND IS NOW A FEDERALLY-
PROTECTED WILDERNESS AREA, WHICH
MEANS IT WILL REMAIN OPEN TO
RECREATION AND CLOSED TO
DEVELOPMENT.
WHEN PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED THE
WILDERNESS BILL INTO LAW, IT WAS
A PERSONAL VICTORY FOR IDAHO
CONGRESSMAN MIKE SIMPSON, WHO
BACKED THE IDEA FOR 15 YEARS.
SIMPSON'S EFFORTS ACCELERATED
EARLIER AFTER MEETING OBAMA
ADVISER JOHN PODESTA LAST YEAR.
>> I SAID, "LISTEN, I'D LIKE SIX
MONTHS TO SEE IF WE COULD GET A
BILL MOVING IN CONGRESS," AND HE
SAID "GO FOR IT."
>> Reporter: DECLARING THESE
MOUNTAINS A NATIONAL MONUMENT
WOULD HAVE PROTECTED THEM, BUT
WOULD HAVE LEFT MANY DETAILS
UNRESOLVED.
AS A WILDERNESSES AREA, THE USES
OF THE LAND ARE MORE STRICTLY
DEFINED.
THE BOULDER-WHITE CLOUDS
MOUNTAINS HAVE HAD SOME FEDERAL
PROTECTION SINCE 1972, WHEN
THEN-GOVERNOR CECIL ANDRUS
STOPPED A MOLYBDENUM MINE FROM
BEING BUILT AT THE BASE OF
CASTLE PEAK MOUNTAIN.
ANDRUS, WHO ALSO SERVED AS
INTERIOR SECRETARY UNDER
PRESIDENT CARTER, INITIALLY
URGED PRESIDENT OBAMA TO USE HIS
EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY TO PROTECT
THE BOULDER WHITE CLOUDS BY
DECLARING THEM A NATIONAL
MONUMENT.
CRAIG GEHRKE IS THE IDAHO
DIRECTOR OF THE WILDERNESS
SOCIETY.
>> THERE WAS STILL A BIG
QUESTION IN OUR MIND WHETHER OR
NOT A CONGRESS COULD REALLY DO
ANYTHING ANYMORE.
SO WE CONTINUED WITH OUR
MONUMENT EFFORT,
>> Reporter: BUT CONGRESSMAN
SIMPSON DECIDED TO MAKE ANOTHER
RUN AT DECLARING THE MOUNTAINS A
WILDERNESS AREA AND GOT HIS BILL
THROUGH THE HOUSE IN JULY.
IDAHO SENATOR JAMES RISCH, WHO
PREVIOUSLY OPPOSED THE BILL,
AGREED TO SPONSOR THE SENATE
VERSION.
>> WHAT CONGRESSMAN SIMPSON WAS
ABLE TO DO IS TO GET EVERYBODY
TO THE TABLE.
HE GOT THE WILDERNESS
PRESERVATIONISTS, THE HIKERS,
THE BACKPACKERS, THE HORSE
PEOPLE, THE MOTORIZED USERS,
INCLUDING BOTH SNOWMOBILES AND
ATV AND MOTORCYCLE PEOPLE TO ALL
AGREE AS TO A MANAGEMENT PLAN
>> Reporter: IDAHO CONSERVATION
LEAGUE DIRECTOR RICK JOHNSON
TOLD A SENATE COMMITTEE HEARING
WHY THE LANDSCAPE NEEDED
PROTECTING.
>> THESE MOUNTAIN RANGES CONTAIN
THE HEADWATERS OF FOUR MAJOR
RIVERS AND ARE HOME TO SOME OF
THE HIGHEST ELEVATION SALMON
HABITAT ON EARTH.
THIS IS A LANDSCAPE OF SUMMER
AND WINTER RANGE FOR BIG GAME
AND CRITICAL HABITAT FOR
ENDANGERED AND ELUSIVE SPECIES
LIKE WOLVERINE.
IT IS ALSO AN UNPARALLELED
RESOURCE FOR MANY DIFFERENT
RECREATIONAL PURSUITS.
>> Reporter: SANDRA MITCHELL,
WHO REPRESENTS SNOWMOBILERS AND
MOTORCYCLISTS, FAVORED THE
CREATION OF A WILDERNESS AREA
BECAUSE THE DESIGNATION CLEARLY
SPELLS OUT HOW THE MOUNTAIN
TRAILS AROUND IT CAN BE USED.
>> THE CHOICE WAS THE NATIONAL
MONUMENT OR THE WILDERNESS AND
WE CAME DOWN ON THE
WILDERNESS BILL IS THE BEST, AND
THEN WE PUT 100% OF OUR SUPPORT
BEHIND IT AND DID EVERYTHING WE
COULD TO PASS IT.
>> Reporter: THE CREATION OF
THIS NEW WILDERNESS AREA IS A
BIG LAW FOR A SMALL WESTERN
STATE THAT ALSO SHOWS EVEN IN
THESE POLITICALLY CHARGED TIMES,
CONGRESS CAN SOMETIMES WORK
QUICKLY TO GET SOMETHING DONE.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, KIM
CHAMBERS IS THE FIRST
WOMAN TO SWIM THE 30 MILES
FROM THE FARALLON ISLANDS TO THE
GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE.
IT TOOK THE WOMAN 17 HOURS AND
12 MINUTES TO NAVIGATE THE SHARK
INFESTED WATERS YESTERDAY.
AND PRO-FOOTBALL HALL OF FAMER
FRANK GIFFORD HAS DIED.
GIFFORD START ON BOTH OFFENSE
AND DEFENSE.
HE LATER HAD A LONG CAREER
COVERING MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL
AND THE OLYMPICS.
GIFFORD DIED OF NATURAL CAUSES
AT HIS HOME IN CONNECTICUT, HE
WAS 84.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW, A
BOOK BY A DOCTOR WHO SURVIVED
EBOLA.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.